docs: add component harnesses guides (#59078)
angular/angular: adev/src/content/guide/testing/creating-component-harnesses.md

### CDK Installation

The [Component Dev Kit (CDK)](https://material.angular.io/cdk/categories) is a set of behavior primitives for building components. To use the component harnesses, first install `@angular/cdk` from npm. You can do this from your terminal using the Angular CLI:

<docs-code language="shell">
  ng add @angular/cdk
</docs-code>

## Extending `ComponentHarness`

The abstract `ComponentHarness` class is the base class for all component harnesses. To create a custom component harness, extend `ComponentHarness` and implement the static property `hostSelector`.

The `hostSelector` property identifies elements in the DOM that match this harness subclass. In most cases, the `hostSelector` should be the same as the selector of the corresponding `Component` or `Directive`. For example, consider a simple popup component:

<docs-code language="typescript">
@Component({
  selector: 'my-popup',
  template: `
    <button (click)="toggle()">{{triggerText}}</button>

>     <div *ngIf="open" class="my-popup-content"><ng-content></ng-content></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    @if (open) {
       <div class="my-popup-content"><ng-content></ng-content></div>
    }
```

  `
})
class MyPopup {

>   @Input() triggerText: string;

Reviewer: Since input() is stable now, would be great to have it here too.

>   open = false;

Reviewer: Should we use a signal for this one?

  protected getTriggerElement = this.locatorFor('button');
  protected getContentElement = this.locatorForOptional('.my-popup-content');

  /** Toggles the open state of the popup. */
  async toggle() {
    const trigger = await this.getTriggerElement();
    return trigger.click();
  }

  /** Checks if the popup us open. */
  async isOpen() {
    const content = await this.getContentElement();
    return !!content;
  }
}
</docs-code>

## Loading harnesses for subcomponents

Larger components often compose sub-components. You can reflect this structure in a component's harness as well. Each of the `locatorFor` methods on `ComponentHarness` has an alternate signature that can be used for locating sub-harnesses rather than elements.

See the [ComponentHarness API reference page](https://material.angular.io/cdk/test-harnesses/api#ComponentHarness) for the full list of the different locatorFor methods.

For example, consider a menu build using the popup from above:

<docs-code language="typescript">
@Component({
  selector: 'my-menu',
  template: `
    <my-popup>
      <ng-content></ng-content>
    </my-popup>
  `
})
class MyMenu {
  @Input() triggerText: string;

>   @ContentChildren(MyMenuItem) items: QueryList<MyMenuItem>;

Reviewer: We can go signal based here too.

# Creating harnesses for your components

## Before you start

Tip: This guide assumes you've already read the [component harnesses overview guide](guide/testing/component-harnesses-overview). Read that first if you're new to using component harnesses.

### When does creating a test harness make sense?

> The Angular team recommends creating component test harnesses for shared components that are used in many places and have some user interactivity. This most commonly applies to widget libraries and similar reusable components. Harnesses are valuable for these cases because they provide the consumers of these shared components a well- supported API for interacting with a component. Tests that use harnesses can avoid depending on unreliable implementation details of these shared components, such as DOM structure and specific event listeners.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Angular team recommends creating component test harnesses for shared components that are used in many places and have some user interactivity. This most commonly applies to widget libraries and similar reusable components. Harnesses are valuable for these cases because they provide the consumers of these shared components a well-supported API for interacting with a component. Tests that use harnesses can avoid depending on unreliable implementation details of these shared components, such as DOM structure and specific event listeners.
```

> For components that appear in only one place, such as a page in an application, harnesses don't provide as much benefit. In these situations, a component's tests can reasonably depend on the implementation details of this component, as the tests and components are updated at the same time. However, harnesses still provide some value if you would use the harness in both unit and end-to-end tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For components that appear in only one place, such as a page in an application, harnesses don't provide as much benefit. In these situations, a component's tests can reasonably depend on the implementation details of this component, as the tests and components are updated at the same time. However, harnesses still provide value if you would use the harness in both unit and end-to-end tests.
```

### CDK Installation

The [Component Dev Kit (CDK)](https://material.angular.io/cdk/categories) is a set of behavior primitives for building components. To use the component harnesses, first install `@angular/cdk` from npm. You can do this from your terminal using the Angular CLI:

<docs-code language="shell">
  ng add @angular/cdk
</docs-code>

## Extending `ComponentHarness`

The abstract `ComponentHarness` class is the base class for all component harnesses. To create a custom component harness, extend `ComponentHarness` and implement the static property `hostSelector`.

> The `hostSelector` property identifies elements in the DOM that match this harness subclass. In most cases, the `hostSelector` should be the same as the selector of the corresponding `Component` or `Directive`. For example, consider a simple popup component:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `hostSelector` property identifies elements in the DOM that match this harness subclass. In most cases, the `hostSelector` should be the same as the selector of the corresponding `Component` or `Directive`. For example, consider a popup component:
```

<docs-code language="typescript">
@Component({
  selector: 'my-popup',
  template: `
    <button (click)="toggle()">{{triggerText()}}</button>
    @if (isOpen()) {
      <div class="my-popup-content"><ng-content></ng-content></div>
    }
  `
})
class MyPopup {
  triggerText = input('');

  isOpen = signal(false);

  toggle() {
    this.isOpen.update((value) => !value);
  }
}
</docs-code>

> In this case, a minimal harness for the component would look like the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's a minimal harness for the `MyPopup` component:
```

<docs-code language="typescript">
class MyPopupHarness extends ComponentHarness {
  static hostSelector = 'my-popup';
}
</docs-code>

While `ComponentHarness` subclasses require only the `hostSelector` property, most harnesses should also implement a static `with` method to generate `HarnessPredicate` instances. The [filtering harnesses section](guide/testing/using-component-harnesses#filtering-harnesses) covers this in more detail.

## Finding elements in the component's DOM

Each instance of a `ComponentHarness` subclass represents a particular instance of the corresponding component. You can access the component's host element via the `host() `method from the `ComponentHarness` base class.

> `ComponentHarness` also offers several methods for locating elements within the component's DOM. These methods are `locatorFor()`, `locatorForOptional()`, and `locatorForAll()`. These methods create functions that find elements, they do not directly find elements. This approach safeguards against caching references to out-of-date elements. For example, when an `ngIf` hides and then shows an element, the result is a new DOM element; using functions ensures that tests always reference the current state of the DOM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ComponentHarness` also offers the `locatorFor()`, `locatorForOptional()`, and `locatorForAll()` methods for locating elements within the component's DOM. These methods create functions that find elements, they do not directly find elements. This approach safeguards against caching references to out-of-date elements. For example, when an `ngIf` hides and then shows an element, the result is a new DOM element; using functions ensures that tests always reference the current state of the DOM.
```

For example, the `MyPopupHarness` example discussed above could provide methods to get the trigger and content elements as follows:

<docs-code language="typescript">
class MyPopupHarness extends ComponentHarness {
  static hostSelector = 'my-popup';

  /** Gets the trigger element */
  getTriggerElement = this.locatorFor('button');

  /** Gets the content element. */
  getContentElement = this.locatorForOptional('.my-popup-content');
}
</docs-code>

## Working with `TestElement` instances

`TestElement` is an abstraction designed to work across different test environments (Unit tests, WebDriver, etc). When using harnesses, you should perform all DOM interaction via this interface. Other means of accessing DOM elements, such as `document.querySelector()`, do not work in all test environments.

`TestElement` has a number of methods to interact with the underlying DOM, such as `blur()`, `click()`, `getAttribute()`, and more. See the [TestElement API reference page](https://material.angular.io/cdk/test-harnesses/api#TestElement) for the full list of methods.

> Do not expose `TestElement` instances to harness users unless it's an element the component consumer defines directly, such as the component's host element. Exposing `TestElement` instances for internal elements leads users to depend on a component's internal DOM structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only expose `TestElement` instances to harness users unless it's an element the component consumer defines directly, such as the component's host element. Exposing `TestElement` instances for internal elements leads users to depend on a component's internal DOM structure.
```

<docs-code language="typescript">
class MyPopupHarness extends ComponentHarness {
  static hostSelector = 'my-popup';

  protected getTriggerElement = this.locatorFor('button');
  protected getContentElement = this.locatorForOptional('.my-popup-content');

  /** Toggles the open state of the popup. */
  async toggle() {
    const trigger = await this.getTriggerElement();
    return trigger.click();
  }

  /** Checks if the popup us open. */
  async isOpen() {
    const content = await this.getContentElement();
    return !!content;
  }
}
</docs-code>

## Loading harnesses for subcomponents

Larger components often compose sub-components. You can reflect this structure in a component's harness as well. Each of the `locatorFor` methods on `ComponentHarness` has an alternate signature that can be used for locating sub-harnesses rather than elements.

See the [ComponentHarness API reference page](https://material.angular.io/cdk/test-harnesses/api#ComponentHarness) for the full list of the different locatorFor methods.

> For example, consider a menu build using the popup from above:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, consider a menu built using the popup from above:
```

<docs-code language="typescript">
class MyMenuHarness extends ComponentHarness {
  static hostSelector = 'my-menu';

  protected getPopupHarness = this.locatorFor(MyPopupHarness);

  /** Gets the currently shown menu items (empty list if menu is closed). */
  getItems = this.locatorForAll(MyMenuItemHarness);

  /** Toggles open state of the menu. */
  async toggle() {
    const popupHarness = await this.getPopupHarness();
    return popupHarness.toggle();
  }
}

class MyMenuItemHarness extends ComponentHarness {
  static hostSelector = 'my-menu-item';
}
</docs-code>

## Filtering harness instances with `HarnessPredicate`
When a page contains multiple instances of a particular component, you may want to filter based on some property of the component to get a particular component instance. For example, you may want a button with some specific text, or a menu with a specific ID. The `HarnessPredicate` class can capture criteria like this for a `ComponentHarness` subclass. While the test author is able to construct `HarnessPredicate` instances manually, it's easier when the `ComponentHarness` subclass provides a helper method to construct predicates for common filters.

> You should create a static `with()` method on each `ComponentHarness` subclass that returns a `HarnessPredicate` for that class. This allows test authors to write easily understandable code, e.g. `loader.getHarness(MyMenuHarness.with({selector: '#menu1'}))`. In addition to the standard selector and ancestor options, the `with` method should add any other options that make sense for the particular subclass.

Reviewer 2: This example is vital to the point of this paragraph, I would move this line into a `<docs-code>` block instead of having it as an "e.g." at the end of the sentence.

```
This allows test authors to write easily understandable code. For example:
<docs-code language="typescript">
`loader.getHarness(MyMenuHarness.with({selector: '#menu1'})
</docs-code>

In addition...
```

<docs-code language="typescript">
class MyPopupHarness extends ComponentHarness {
  static hostSelector = 'my-popup';

  /** Gets a `HarnessLoader` whose root element is the popup's content element. */
  async getHarnessLoaderForContent(): Promise<HarnessLoader> {
    const rootLocator = this.documentRootLocatorFactory();
    return rootLocator.harnessLoaderFor('my-popup-content');
  }
}
</docs-code>

## Waiting for asynchronous tasks

The methods on `TestElement` automatically trigger Angular's change detection and wait for tasks inside the `NgZone`. In most cases no special effort is required for harness authors to wait on asynchronous tasks. However, there are some edge cases where this may not be sufficient.

Under some circumstances, Angular animations may require a second cycle of change detection and subsequent `NgZone` stabilization before animation events are fully flushed. In cases where this is needed, the `ComponentHarness` offers a `forceStabilize()` method that can be called to do the second round.

> You can use `NgZone.runOutsideAngular()` to schedule tasks outside of NgZone. Call the `waitForTasksOutsideAngular()` method on the corresponding harness if you need to explicitly wait for tasks outside `NgZone` since this does not happen automatically.

Reviewer 2: I would consider maybe linking to these methods since they will contain more information if someone isn't familiar.
